## How do changes in society affect design?

It’s a big question. I can give many answers to it but I will try to give you a few. We were discussing the crisis [2008], that has been extremely influential in how designers work today. When the crisis took place it affected everybody. So, whether you’re a butcher or a teacher, or a designer, I think everybody had this feeling that something changed and it would never be the same anymore. So, what I’m going to do? It fundamentally changed the perspective of many people.  Here in the west we had this feeling that the only way was up, it will always be progress. We have a fantastic society, everybody is taken care of and that will be there in future as well. Now, I only have to look at myself, but many other people are certainly aware of the fact that, maybe our children will not have the same progress we have experienced in our lives. I mean, after the war my parents had a better life than their parents, and I have a better life than my parents. Better life in the sense that I have more money, more access to all kinds of governmental support, media, etc. I think that we are all aware of the fact that our children will have less instead of more. Less money, less wealth, less developments. There’s an awareness that this could happen. That maybe the west is not just growing and getting better and better. It’s some kind of myth. Maybe it’s going back. Because other countries like China are the ones that are growing and that again is a very big question. So after this crises I think that many people got more aware of  ‘what am I doing; why am I doing things that I do?’. The awareness about the environment, the refugees crises, all these big, big topics. And many designers, many people in the creative industry are picking up these societal issues. That’s also why you see, that ‘What design can do’ [www.whatdesigncando.com] appeals to many people. I think it’s in the air. People think ‘I can make money with my skills as a designer, but I can also try to add something to the world’. Nowadays many designers are not only delivering a service to a client, or to a company but they are also initiating things themselves. And that’s a big change. A big shift for, let’s say, the last ten or twenty years. So it’s not so much about style anymore, about handwriting. Twenty years ago this was very important for a designer. Nowadays it is more about how innovative, how inventive can you be in developing something new or trying to give an answer to e certain problem. Developing a service or an app, or a product and trying to bring that to the market on your own. Not only for big companies.

## So what is the direction that designers should go? Do they have to become entrepreneurs?

I think that the designer as an initiator – it’s already happening and it will be more important in the near future. For example this guy, who did FAIRPHONE www.fairphone.com. He is a Dutch designer, Bas van Abel is his name. He developed this FAIRPHONE idea, which is very innovative. It is environmentally and socially responsible, it’s a cool telephone, it has all these different aspects in it. And he developed it himself. There was no client. He said, I’m going to do this, I’m going to find the money, I’m going to find the people I want to work with, I’m going to find the companies. He was working together with the telephone provider KPN. It’s a big telephone provider like T-mobile. So he is not pushing them away – he is embracing them.  And maybe that’s one of the big differences to some years ago. If you can’t beat them – join them, but in a responsible way. You can also do it together. It sounds a little bit soft, but it’s also a difference from how our last generation did it. 

## And how could designers protect their professional work? Should there be any barriers for entering the design market?

That’s impossible, I think. It’s an open profession, we live in an open society, there’s Internet, forget it. It’s the same with copyright. It’s still there but that is really something we have to redefine. All these clichés like 3D printing, you also see it in the music industry, now with Spotify… protecting your professional work is extremely difficult, I think.

## So it’s a self-regulating market and designers should not do anything about it?

You could say that in the end quality will always come up. And of course there will be a lot of trash that comes up. It goes hand in hands, like life. I don’t think we can regulate that. You do have it with architecture, it is a protected profession. But on the other hand, there are a lot of people who design houses and buildings. As long as you have an engineer, who can put their autograph on it, you can build it.

## How do you think that the price of a professional design service should be formed?

The only thing I know is, that in the Netherlands it is forbidden to regulate prices. Because then you create a so called cartel. Thus you disrupt the open market. It’s a free profession, and there’s no low limit, if you want to do it for 5 or for 50 thousand Euros, that’s your choice.  It’s just the way it is. I know the frustration and I also know that some years ago the Dutch association of designers tried to do something about that. It’s the same with competitions, with pitches. Everybody hates to pitch, every designer or design agency. So we thought maybe we should make some kind of a standard, formulated in rules how to do pitches. Then somebody from Dutch Government who joined this discussion (there was a small conference on this topic) said that if we do this, the Dutch Government would sew us, because it is forbidden. Then you disrupt competition in the Netherlands. And it’s probably the same story in Germany. And that’s funny, because for example, there is a minimum rate for lawyers. It is a regulated profession. Not everybody can become a lawyer. It is not allowed to charge less than a certain amount per hour. They have to stick to that rule. They can charge a higher fee, but they cannot go down. But it also of course has to do with very basic, fundamental human rights rules.

## So, what is your perspective on this?

Sometimes I wish to have regulated profession but it’s just the way it is, on the other hand we have a creative profession and it is also very diffuse. Nowadays we are not only graphic designers making a typeface, or designing posters, or websites. I also see that in my own profession, it is not strict. It is diffuse.  

## But in the core of it there is intellectual achievement, that I think should be protected in some way.

In the ideal world, yes. (laughing) I might sound a little bit cynical about that, but I don’t mean it this way. Sometimes I hate it, but I also see that in an open society with open and creative professions it is very difficult to pinpoint and to frame them. If you say ‘This is what I make, it’s protected and it’s worth this amount of money’, and if it is too expensive, the client would go to somebody else. That is sometimes a little bit depressing, but I really do not think we could do anything about that.

## Is there a problem in the practice of the profession you think is the toughest?

You could argue if being a designer or a creative, you can also be a good entrepreneur. Because when you are a good creative, that’s my opinion, you have to be attached to things. You work on them with passion and you really get attached to a certain project or story. Being a good entrepreneur you have to be deattached. If you want to be a good entrepreneur the main focus is making money. And if you want to make money, you must be able to cut loose in a certain moment. To say ‘This is not working, destroy it, let’s focus on that! If this is not making enough money, push it out, let’s focus on that’. When you are a designer sometimes it’s not relevant if it makes money or not. It’s a good project, when it is creative, or interesting in the content, in the meaning. These things can be very important and not per se making money.

## Yes, I think this is the same with social entrepreneurship.

Yes. So, there’s a difficult balance. And I also always bump into that, I am a very bad entrepreneur. So, that would be great if there, maybe already in art school, would be more focus on that. Or, that designers could organize that a little bit better. 

## So you think that there should be a focus on entrepreneurship in the education of designers, when you think about what’s happening with the profession right now?

Yes. Or it should offer easy access to people who know how to be entrepreneurs. You see that, by the way, also in successful designers – most of the time they have a business. There’s a partner who is only  focusing on business. For example, some very famous designers in the Netherlands they always have business counterpart, so that he or she can focus on the creative side and the other one is just taking care of the company, making money, making sure that the company is healthy. Sounds very simple, but I think it’s extremely important.
